---
layout: default
title: Belle da Costa Greene and The Morgan's JDM Plates
author: Meredith Levin
permalink: /provenance/
---

# Macroscope of the *Journal des dames et des modes*

This study is based on 499 images of the *Journal des dames et des modes* provided by The Morgan Library and Museum. The images were cropped in Photoshop and resized by 702x1248 pixels. In the original plates you can notice that each figure is framed with a black rectangle and also has a brief text describing the scene. For this study, I decided to crop the frame and text because they do not add any relevant information when analyzing the visual aspect of the portrayed human figures or accessories. On the other hand, it is important to mention that the images of the original plates are photographs of different sizes and taken with different light quality. Some of the photographs are also a bit cropped and tilted. All of these factors influenced the visualizations created in ImageJ and ImagePlot.

After croping and resizing all the images, a spreadsheet was created in Excel to add the metadata of each image. Subsequently, the edited images ready and the metadata were imported to ImageJ as an the image sequence. Using that software I created a Montage of 25 by 20 images of the *Journal des dames et des modes.*

![](/media/macroscope/image1.png)


The Morgan Library & Museum’s collection of nearly 500 Directoire-era
costume plates, originally published in the influential Journal des
dames et des modes (JDM), are a veritable treasure trove, highlighting
the radical shifts in French fashion that transpired during the
turbulent years between 1797 and 1804.

![](media/image1.png){width="4.257911198600175in" height="5.03125in"}

J.P. Morgan, the American financier, benefactor, and avid collector of
paintings, books, manuscripts, prints & drawings, acquired 18th-century
costume plates in May 1907 from a Parisian bookseller named Ludovic
Badin. Correspondence preserved in The Morgan’s archives tells us that
J.P. Morgan had begun acquiring manuscripts, Books of Hours, and costume
plates from Badin’s eclectic holdings as early as 1905. (Letter from
Ludovic Badin to J.P. Morgan, May 18, 1905, The Morgan Library & Museum)

![](media/image2.png){width="4.253155074365704in"
height="3.5104166666666665in"}

In addition to acquiring and selling rare books, manuscripts, and objets
d’art to wealthy Americans and Europeans, Ludovic Badin worked as the
Assistant Managing Director of the luxurious couture house of German
designer Gustave Beer on the Place Vendome in Paris. Badin may even have
met some of his clients, including Morgan, through Beer. This June 21st
1906 bill, written on Beer letterhead, for 93,500 francs worth of
‘objects’ purchased by Morgan from Badin, indicates the monumental scale
of Morgan’s quest to fill his library back in New York. (The Morgan
Library & Museum)

![](media/image3.png){width="3.317062554680665in"
height="3.786979440069991in"}

Though not described specifically as engravings from the Journal des
dames et des modes, a bound volume of “coloured ‘Directoire’ costumes
plates” is included on a list of items purchased by J.P. Morgan from
Badin in Paris in May 1907. Most interestingly, the list has been
annotated by Morgan’s young librarian, Belle da Costa Greene, whom he
hired in 1906 to manage his burgeoning collection. She signs and dates
the list on September 2, 1907, meaning that the costume plates have
already made their way to New York.\
(The Morgan Library & Museum)

![](media/image4.png){width="4.625in" height="5.78125in"}

Belle da Costa Greene worked for the Morgan family for nearly fifty
years, helping J.P. Morgan and his son amass an unrivaled collection of
rare manuscripts, books, and art. In 1924, when the Pierpont Morgan
Library was incorporated by New York State as a public institution, the
Board of Trustees appointed her its first director, a post she held
until her retirement in 1948. Born Belle Marion Greener in 1879, she was
the daughter of Richard Greener, a lawyer, Republic Party activist and
the first black graduate of Harvard College. Belle was a remarkable
woman, an African American passing as white (her mother changed their
surname from Greener to Greene and claimed nonexistent Portuguese
ancestors), an expert librarian with a vast knowledge of illuminated
manuscripts who began her career at Princeton University, and only the
second woman elected a Fellow of the Medieval Academy of America, among
her many notable achievements. For more on Belle’s life, see Koppelman,
Constance. "Greene, Belle da Costa (1879-1950), library director,
bibliographer, and art connoisseur." *American National
Biography*.  February, 2000. Oxford University Press,. Date of access 9
Jul.
2019, &lt;https://www.anb.org/view/10.1093/anb/9780198606697.001.0001/anb-9780198606697-e-1701223&gt;
(Photograph of Belle from 1911 by the American photographer, Clarence H.
White, courtesy of the Princeton University Art Museum)

![](media/image5.png){width="6.5in" height="3.65625in"}

Belle was famous in her day, not merely with booksellers, collectors,
and fellow librarians, but with the wider public, making headlines with
each major purchase she completed on J.P. Morgan’s behalf. *The New York
Herald Tribune* claimed, perhaps exaggeratedly, in an October 1948 story
about Belle’s career: “She is reputed to know the value of nearly every
rare volume in existence and probably has passed judgment on more
precious manuscripts than any other woman.” Another article, published
on March 16, 1921 in the *Omaha Daily Bee*, shares her astonishingly
large salary and her fearless approach to bidding at auction, including
the daring (and successful) last-minute bid she made for the Caxton
*Morte D’Arthur*, paying a whopping \$42,800. (Chronicling America:
America’s Historical Newspapers, Library of Congress)

![](media/image6.png){width="4.276150481189851in"
height="4.104166666666667in"}

Belle da Costa Greene was revered for her intellect and she enjoyed a
prominent position in elite circles thanks to her close relationship
with J.P. Morgan, but she was also heralded as a great beauty with
impeccable style. Her designer wardrobe was legendary and it is easy to
imagine Belle encouraging J.P. Morgan to acquire costume plates as he
built his collection, given her taste for high fashion. Belle’s
connoisseurship extended to her personal library, for which she
commissioned a lovely etched bookplate by the artist Edward Gordon Craig
in 1911.\
(Courtesy of Princeton University Rare Books and Special Collections,
Graphic Arts Collection, Firestone Library)

![](media/image7.png){width="3.5208333333333335in"
height="5.666666666666667in"}

A 1913 pastel portrait of Belle by the French artist Paul César Helleu
captures her elegance and glamor, including the feather in her hat. Her
1950 obituary in the *New York Herald Tribune* describes her “great
plumed hats” and how “the sight of them in an auction room was enough to
agitate every other bidder present.” It is worth noting that, perhaps
not coincidentally, the venerable *Journal des dames et des modes* was
restarted in France in 1912 to once more showcase Parisian fashions and
lifestyles. (Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons)

![https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/20/Belle\_da\_Costa\_Greene\_by\_Paul-Cesar\_Helleu%2C\_c\_1913.jpg](media/image8.jpeg){width="2.066661198600175in"
height="2.9479166666666665in"}
![](media/image9.png){width="2.5187423447069115in"
height="4.354166666666667in"}

The design of the 20th-century JDM plates is astonishingly similar to
that of the original 18th-century plates—there is no mistaking the
influence of the earlier publication on the new iteration of the
Journal. The new JDM stopped publishing in 1914 after the outbreak of
WWI but it seems very plausible that Belle da Costa Greene was among the
many fashionable women who could have looked to the JDM for the latest
trends and style guidelines. This plate from 1913, the same year as
Helleu’s portrait of Belle, bears a striking resemblance to Belle’s
outfit, from the feather in the hat to the fur wrap around the neck to
the lines of the coat, telling us that Belle was indeed, as they say in
Paris, très branché. (Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons)

Not much is known about Belle’s life and activities after her retirement
in 1948. She died in May 1950 at St. Luke’s Hospital in New York and her
*New York Times* obituary describes her “very wide reputation among
bibliophiles…” A review in the *Times* from Sunday, April 17, 1949 of
The Morgan’s retrospective exhibition celebrating Belle’s tenure at the
library and its 25-year anniversary as a public institution rightly
credits her with The Morgan’s triumph: “For it was Miss Greene who
transformed a rich man’s casually built collection into one which ranks
with the greatest in the world. The proof of her unfailing eye and sense
of quality is offered in a current exhibition. …Scholars seek her and
dealers trembled at her quick, uncompromising pronouncements. She was at
home with the great procession of royalty and diplomats, scholars and
students who visited the collection.”\
Extra images:

![](media/image10.png){width="2.449728783902012in"
height="4.208333333333333in"}

(photo from 1911 courtesy of The Morgan)

![https://www.themorgan.org/sites/default/files/images/exhibitions/online/AZ164\_belle.jpg](media/image11.jpeg){width="3.125in"
height="4.177083333333333in"}

Laura Coombs Hills. Watercolor on ivory of Belle da Costa Greene, ca.
1910. Gift of the estate of Belle da Costa Greene, 1950. (Courtesy of
The Morgan)

![](media/image12.png){width="6.03125in" height="8.15625in"}

The American Club Woman Magazine, volumes 7, no. 6, June 1914 (courtesy
of Google Books)

![](media/image13.png){width="4.333333333333333in" height="5.4375in"}

“Fifty Thousand Dollars for that Book!” Color-printed illustration by
Alexander Popini published on page one of *The World Magazine* (New
York), May 21, 1911.


